---
title: "Deep Thoughts with Makey Makey"
layout: post
description: "Media theory/media practice"
categories: coding blog
---

To first respond to my partner’s “coding” reflection blog (even though we’re no longer actually coding, it’s too late in the semester to break my habit of both thinking of and categorizing via Github these posts as “coding blogs”), [Diana](http://dianarosenberger.github.io/blog/2016-04-14/week10post1.html) is right that we are both genuinely excited about continuing to think about the intersection between media theory, media practice, and literary aesthetics by taking ideas originated in our Makey Makey demo to the final project. Also, I’m digging the point Diana made in her blog that “There are some interesting intersections between the collaborative authorship our Makey Makey explores and the collaborative authorship actually exercised in creating the project/design document.” Reading it, I’m surprised/embarrassed I didn’t think of it too, but then thinking back to my fried state of mind yesterday evening post-design document, I guess I shouldn’t be too shocked. Collective authorship ain’t easy.

I also want to do a bit of reflection on the Makey Makey projects we saw in last week’s lab. I was really impressed by [Noah](http://noahmcmlln.github.io/blog/2016-04-13/finishing-up.html) and [Hassan’s](http://hassana85.github.io/blog/2016-04-11/Noah-&-Hassan's-Design-Document.html) concept of re-learning basic video game controls, and their execution of the demo, complete with simulated arcade machine. I was honestly impressed with all of our demos, especially because of the cavernous blank thought bubble that expanded inside my brain when Scott first described the project. Perhaps surprisingly, this assignment moreso than learning to code has demonstrated to me the power of simultaneous engagement with media theory and practice. Without the critical framework of Benjamin, Jagoda, and Golumbia (for Hassan and Noah) or Manovich, Galloway, and Cohen (for Diana and I), our projects may well have stayed at the level of activity seen in the lab where we initially tested the Makey Makeys. And while fistbumping to close a circuit and play/pause Hanson’s “Mmmbop!” on Youtube with Diana was certainly satisfying and hilarious, I’m glad we had the opportunity to think a little bit deeper about theoretical concepts that have repeatedly cropped up this semester.
